the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so let's consider a reaction and
consider the effect of temperature on
this reaction on the thermodynamics of
the reaction so this is the
decomposition of sodium bicarbonate does
anyone know what another name for
bicarbonate is if you were gonna send
someone to the grocery store to buy some
what would you tell them to get yeah so
you would probably say yeah look for
baking soda does anyone know what this
is used for how it works yes
so what what is baking soda doing what
do you what step of baking are you using
it for yeah brave rising so is this
reaction you're forming gas and that gas
helps bread to rise so this this process
happening while it's baking allows for
for bread rising and things like that so
baking soda you always want to make sure
you add your baking soda all right so
let's consider the thermodynamics of
this reaction Delta H naught is a
positive value one three five point six
kilojoules and why don't you tell me
which of these you think is going to be
the Delta s of these options
all right just ten more seconds
yep so the positive value that is a very
good guess and that is correct because
we're going from solids to gases so you
would predict that entropy would be
increasing things are not moving very
much with a solid with a gas they can
you have more disorder more freedom all
right so that is in fact the correct
value for this Delta s naught is plus
0.33 for kilojoules I already put it in
kilojoules for you and now we can
calculate the Delta G for this reaction
and let's first do it at room
temperature so we have Delta H positive
value and endothermic reaction room
we'll do it at room temperature first in
Kelvin so we can cancel our units and we
put in our R Delta s value here and then
we can calculate it out and Delta G
naught is plus 36.1 kilojoules per mole
that is not a spontaneous reaction so
our bread is not going to rise and our
baking will be failed except that we're
probably not going to be baking it in
the oven at room temperature so this
would be non spontaneous but when we
bake we're going to heat the oven and so
usually 350 or something which is 450
Kelvin so now we can do the equation
again we plug in our Delta H our new
temperature and our Delta s and we get a
negative value Delta G naught is minus
fourteen point seven kilojoules per mole
at 450 degrees Kelvin so this would be
spontaneous so when you're baking you
want to remember to turn your oven on
heat it up and put in your baking soda
all right so let's think about now this
type of reaction that has a positive
Delta H and a positive Delta s so these
both have the same sign and if both
Delta H and Delta s have the same sign
temperature can be used to control
spontaneity
it'll be non spontaneous at one
temperature but spontaneous at another
temperature and if we assume Delta H
nought and Delta s naught are
independent of temperature which is fine
to do that's a good assumption then
Delta G naught which is definitely
dependent on temperature is linear is a
linear function with temperature so
let's plot now those two temperature are
those two values of Delta G that we just
calculated so here's our plot we have
Delta G nought kilojoules per mole on
the y-axis and temperature on the x-axis
and let's put in the numbers that we had
so we had calculated a room temperature
around 300 Kelvin a value of about 26
positive 26 kilojoules per mole and we
calculated then at about 450 Kelvin a
value about minus fourteen point seven
almost minus fifteen kilojoules per mole
and when you have two points you can
draw a suit aful straight line when you
have more sometimes it's more
complicated but it is linear Delta G
naught is linear with temperature all
right so now let's think about this is a
straight line and we can think about an
equation for a straight line so the
equation that we know and love Delta G
nought equals Delta H minus T Delta s
can be now rearranged we have Delta G on
the y-axis here we have temperature is
our x-axis so now we just rearranged
we've pulled Delta a minus Delta s
naught over here and Delta H naught R
over here so Delta H is our y-intercept
and for some reason your notes just say
y dash
I don't know what happened to intercept
part but anyway that's the y-intercept
is Delta H nought and what is the slope
yeah so the slope is negative Delta s so
if you plotted Delta G's versus
temperature you could get out your Delta
H or you could get out from the slope
your Delta s and let's think about these
different parts of the plot
so over here Delta Delta G is greater
than zero it's a positive value and what
does that mean about the spontaneity of
the reaction if it's Delta G is positive
right so that's non spontaneous down
here we have Delta G mine and minus
value less than zero so there it's
spontaneous so at some temperatures the
reaction is non spontaneous and in other
temperatures the reaction spontaneous
and there is a certain value of T T star
that is the temperature at which it
switches from non spontaneous to
spontaneous or if you're decreasing
temperatures spontaneous to non
spontaneous and for a particular
reaction you can calculate what that
temperature value is what T star is so
let's do that so we can calculate T star
and so again this is the temperature at
Delta G equals zero where you have that
switch point between spontaneous and non
spontaneous so we can set Delta G naught
equal to zero and then we can solve for
T star so T star would just be Delta H
naught over Delta s naught because this
is set to zero and we can plug these
values in so Delta H again was plus 136
kilojoules per mole and Delta s naught
was plus 0.33 for kilojoules per Kell
per mole and we can calculate out a
temperature of 406 Kelvin so this is the
temperature at which you have this
switch from a spontaneous to a non
spontaneous process so if you're cooking
your bread below 406 you get something
that looks like this the first time my
husband is the chef in our family and
the first time I was tasked with making
cupcakes for my daughter school I forgot
to put the baking soda in um but if you
put enough frosting on it and the kids
are 4 years old it totally doesn't
matter anyway if I had put in the baking
soda and cooked it at temperatures above
406 Kelvin I would have had something
that looked a whole lot better
I wouldn't even had to put frosting on
but no I would have four years old you
have to put frosting never mind it all
worked out okay so there is this
temperature at which you have a switch
if the sine of Delta H and the sine of
Delta s are the same all right so now
let's think about another case where you
have Delta Delta H nought and Delta s
are both negative values
what would this plot look like and here
are some options for you
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
nice 90% excellent all right so that is
correct so we can draw that now in your
handout so here if they're both negative
down here we have Delta s is a negative
value spontaneous you'll have a negative
Delta G and here you have a negative
Delta H minus T times a negative Delta s
so this will be a positive term and this
will be a negative term and to be
spontaneous you want a negative overall
so at low temperatures the unfavorable
Delta s is down weighted so at low
temperatures your spontaneous but as the
temperature increases you'll get to a
magic temperature a T star in which this
T Delta s term now becomes greater than
the Delta H term this will be a big
positive value compared to a smaller one
and you'll switch to a positive Delta G
and a non spontaneous process
all right let's consider all the options
now okay one more
all right ten more seconds
great okay yeah I knew those other
clicker questions were going to be
deciding the winners I feel like okay so
yes this is always going to be
spontaneous so if we remember the
equation and if you don't have it
memorized yet you will soon even though
we'll be on an equation sheet most
people don't need it you use it so much
so when Delta H nought is negative and
this is positive Delta G is always going
to be negative so it'll always be
spontaneous and so when Delta Delta G
nought will always be negative at every
single temperature so now let's think
about this one positive Delta H negative
Delta s what will this be you can just
yell it out never spontaneous right so
oh it positive and then here with
another positive a minus a minus another
positive it'll never be spontaneous how
sad for it so Delta G will always be
positive at all temperatures so here are
cases where Delta H and Delta s have
have different signs but now we have
cases where they're both positive are
they're both negative so for the both
positive case this will be sometimes
spontaneous it'll depend on T so when
will Delta G be negative and therefore
the reaction be spontaneous when T is
greater or smaller than T star greater
right so here we have a positive Delta H
endothermic reaction we have a positive
Delta s and so when this term when T is
big here this term will dominate and you
can still get a negative Delta G nought
so when temperatures are above that
magic temperature and then our last case
when we have a negative Delta H an
exothermic reaction
and a negative Delta s not and again
that will depend on temperature so when
they have the same signs temperature
makes a difference and here you will
have a negative Delta G when you have a
smaller temperature because here you
want the Delta H term that's the
negative term and you want that to be
the bigger term and so you want to have
smaller temperatures that will down wait
the the positive Delta s naught over
here or negative Delta s naught sorry
over here so these are our four
possibilities always spontaneous never
spontaneous and then sometimes
spontaneous and it depends on the
temperature compared to T star and T
star again is the temperature at which
you switch between spontaneous and non
spontaneous so temperature is important
temperature is important to
thermodynamics and temperature is also
important to kinetics most of the time
you can speed up a reaction or at least
an elementary reaction when you increase
the temperature all right so now let's
think about thermodynamics in biological
systems and think about very important
interaction in biological systems which
is hydrogen bonding so this is also
great review for the exam on Monday so
hydrogen bonding are interactions
between hydrogen bond donors so what is
a hydrogen bond donor a hydrogen bond
donor is a hydrogen in a polar bond so
this is why it's good review for exam
two because for exam two you should be
able to identify polar and nonpolar
bonds so a hydrogen bond donor is a
hydrogen in a polar bond and a hydrogen
bond acceptor is an electronegative atom
with a lone pair and electronegativity
is also a topic on exam two
so might as well learn it for Monday and
then continue to learn it because you'll
also need it for thermodynamics
and later on as well alright so here we
have a bond between something X and a
hydrogen and here we have Y that's
electronegative atom with a lone pair
and this little squiggly plus thing here
indicates that it has sort of a partial
positive charge and here you have a
negative charge and that's gonna make
for a nice favorable interaction this
hydrogen bond so X is something that
will lead to a polar bond such as
nitrogen oxygen or fluorine nitrogen and
oxygen being the most relevant to
biological systems so if you have n or O
here that's a polar bond and so that
will then form a hydrogen bond with an
electronegative atom that has a lone
pair and examples of that are also
nitrogen oxygen fluorine and I treated
an oxygen again being the most relevant
for biological systems so we have this
interaction because these sort of
partial charges here that form this nice
hydrogen bonding interaction so if we
look at one of the most important
molecules that hydrogen bonds which is
water we see that water has polar bonds
between the oxygen and the hydrogen
because those have electronegativity
difference of greater than 0.4 and it
has two lone pairs so water is capable
of being a hydrogen bond donor with its
hydrogen and also a hydrogen bond
acceptor and so if we draw the hydrogen
bonds as dotted lines here we see this o
H polar bond is a hydrogen bond donor
and this oxygen here with its lone pair
is the hydrogen bond acceptor so here we
have this network of hydrogen bonding
interactions both on the board and on my
t-shirt I also have water hydrogen
bonding on my t-shirt today so this
these hydrogen bonds in water are really
important for life this is a very very
important property
now just for exam review what is the
shape of that molecule
what do they expect between the hydrogen
oxygen and the nitrogen less than 100
and 9.5 that's right what would be the
SN number for yes okay good good okay if
those answers seem like I have no idea
what everyone's talking about you know
what your weekend is going to involve
those are things that are going to be on
the exam
that's Berg yes okay so let's compare
now polar polar hydrogen bonds with
covalent bonds so here we have a
hydrogen bond donor and acceptor versus
a covalent interaction so covalent
interaction where you have a bond where
you have bonding electrons are being
shared between the two so covalent bonds
are stronger than hydrogen bonds for
sure and let's look at some examples so
if we consider this X as an oxygen here
in a oxygen hydrogen polar bond
interacting with another oxygen the
value for that hydrogen bond would be
about 20 kilojoules per mole as opposed
to the covalent bond here just the
hydrogen and oxygen has 463 kilojoules
per mole so the hydrogen bond is
considerably weaker than a covalent bond
but it's still weak bonds turn out to be
really important in biological systems
now let's consider a case where we have
nitrogen as the acceptor so we're going
to have a nitrogen acceptor here so if
this is o H donating to n then we have
29 kilojoules per mole n H interacting
with n 14 compared to a covalent bond
between h and n of 388 so when you
compare two covalent bonds hydrogen
bonds are much less but they're still
super important so for bonds that are
made up between molecules here inter
molecular between
molecules these are the hydrogen bonds
are the strongest kind of interactions
that are between molecules here so
hydrogen bonds can be between molecules
they can also be made within a molecule
so this just shows hydrogen bonding in a
protein structure between these are
called beta strands here and hydrogen
bonding is incredibly important in
forming protein structure really really
important so hydrogen bonds are
responsible for for protein folding very
important in proteins hydrogen bonds are
also really important for DNA so all of
the kind of main and RNA all of our kind
of macro molecular molecules of life
hydrogen bonding is really important so
let's look at a GC base pair that forms
in DNA and we can think about the
hydrogen bonds here so here are three of
them so we have this polar bond between
N and H and it's the hydrogen bond donor
and we have the lone pair on oxygen
accepting that hydrogen bond here we
have a polar bond between nitrogen and
hydrogen donating over here to a
nitrogen lone pair and here we have an
NH polar bond as a hydrogen bond donor
to the lone pair on this oxygen and this
is this hydrogen bonding pattern is what
allows DNA to have its beautiful double
helix and is very very important okay so
like why don't you give it a try and
tell me how many hydrogen bonds you
would get between these guys here and
I'll leave this structure up so you can
see what it looks like
alright 10 seconds
all right the answer is to let's take a
look at that over here so you have
nitrogen a polar bond over here making
an interaction with this lone pair you
have a polar and H bond here hydrogen
donor to this lone pair why is that not
a hydrogen bond because it's carbon
hydrogen so carbon hydrogen the
electronegativity difference is not
greater than 0.4 so carbon hydrogen is
not a polar bond so you need to have
both a polar bond and you need to have
an electronegative atom that has lone
pairs to be the hydrogen bond acceptor
so here you have a hydrogen bond
acceptor but you don't have a hydrogen
bond donor and so this actually turns
out to be important because you want to
specifically recognize one base with
another base and so the hydrogen bonding
pattern is essential for that working
out so here these hydrogen bonds I said
they're weaker than covalent bonds but
they're strong enough to help stabilize
the structure of DNA but they're not so
strong that they can't DNA cannot unzip
and you need to unzip DNA to read it and
by reading that's essential to make
another copy to have cell division or to
translate your genetic code so that's I
think why hydrogen bonds are so
important in biology so you don't want a
lot of super strong bonds you want
weaker interactions because in biology
things are moving around so let's talk
about the importance of hydrogen bonding
and for this we have another in their
own words segment
RNA interference is simply a silencing
mechanism that cells use to turn down
the expression of a gene double-stranded
RNA pieces have some sort of
complementarity to a sequence within the
genome that double-stranded RNA piece
binds to a big large protein complex it
unwinds the double-stranded piece takes
one of those trains only and finds the
gene that it complements with and once
it does it binds to that particular RNA
from that gene and it destroys it
not allowing protein to be made from
that RNA DNA and RNA both can form base
pairs by hydrogen bonding the short
piece of RNA that is found in this
protein complex guides that RNA and
basically finds this match by hydrogen
bonding so if it forms a hydrogen bond
along the whole entire sequence it knows
it has found a match somewhere in the
sequence and that's how it recognizes
the gene that is targeting macular
degeneration is a disease of the retina
there are too many blood vessels in the
retina they can bleed and scar over time
and eventually this patient's can become
blind some patients with this disease
one of the reasons they have an
outgrowth in the retina is because there
is a gene called VEGF that there's too
much of and VEGF tell cells make blood
vessels
RNA interference is being used to
silence the expression of this gene so
that impatience with macular
degeneration you don't get further
growth of more blood vessels and more
bleeding and scarring as a consequence
my dream for ironing I will be that as a
patient you will go into the doctor if
you were diagnosed with some sort of
disease the doctor will go into the
computer will order you some
double-stranded RNA for the particular
gene that has been mutated or is
malfunctioning in your disease and you
will then come back and they will put
that the Western the RNA into you and
you will get better that will be my
dream that it could be applicable to
pretty much any disease or viral
infection that you can think of you've
heard of like RNAi I or treatments and
things and sort of yeah a number of
people and like customized medicine I
mean I think that that would be such an
incredible thing if this works out to
really be able to treat every individual
based on their on their DNA so we're not
there yet but there's a lot of people
who are who are working on this and
there's a lot being done at at MIT
research and RNA and that particular
work was in Phil sharp laboratory Phil
sharp is one of our Nobel laureates here
at MIT okay so that's why hydrogen
bonding is important so let's just do
one more example of thermodynamics in
biological systems and we're back to
thinking about ATP which we talked about
already and the hydrolysis of ATP so we
saw that this is a spontaneous reaction
before and this can be what's called
coupled to a non spontaneous process to
drive that non spontaneous reaction so
the total change in free energy of a
coupled reaction is the sum of the
individual Delta G's so if you have one
that is unfavorable and one that's
favorable one that's positive and one
that's negative you sum that up and if
it's over
all negative then it'll become a
spontaneous coupled reaction so let's
look at this example again so we have
Delta G nought for ATP at 310 Kelvin why
do you think I'm using 310 what do you
think that temperature is body
temperature right so we have ATP so you
have triphosphates that's the TP and
hydrolysis you're losing one of the
phosphates you're going to a diphosphate
and hydrolysis means a cleavage reaction
that involves water so we saw before
that the Delta H nought for this is
negative it's an exothermic reaction
minus 24 kilojoules per mole Delta s
nought is plus 22 joules per Kelvin per
mole and so if we plug this into our
Delta G equation we have Delta H minus T
Delta s at body temperature this is a
negative value negative 31 kilojoules
per mole so this is spontaneous the
hydrolysis of ATP is spontaneous now we
want to couple this to something that's
non spontaneous and the reaction we're
going to couple to that's non
spontaneous is the addition of a
phosphate group to glucose and this
keeps the glucose in the cell because
things that have charge don't can't go
come and leave the cell as readily so
nature often does this is way of holding
the things that it wants inside the cell
inside the cell but this is a non
spontaneous process the Delta G nought
is plus 17 kilojoules per mole but if we
couple that to the hydrolysis of ATP
which is minus 31 kilojoules per mole
and we can add those together so 17
minus 31 gives us minus 14 kilojoules
per mole and now this non spontaneous
reaction is driven forward so we've
taken something that wasn't favorable
and made it favorable by coupling it to
ATP
Ellis's so if ATP hydrolysis is so
favorable and it's spontaneous why isn't
it happening all the time which would be
really bad for us because we store our
energy in the form of ATP so we want to
keep it in its good form and the answer
again is kinetics it's a slow process so
ATP is inert enough that we can use it
as an energy storage
you